So, welcome to the NPTEL MOOC on the design
and analysis of algorithms.
So, here are some of the things that we would
be looking at in this course.
When we study algorithms, the first thing
that we need to convince our selves is that
the algorithm is correct and it is doing the
job that we expect it to do.
So, we look at the strategies for proving
the correctness of algorithms.
The other important aspect of algorithm is
of course its efficiency.
How much time does the algorithms take on
inputs?
Now, of course we have to factor in the size
of the input.
And we need a notation or a way of comparing
two different algorithms, which operate on
the same types of inputs and produce the same
types of outputs.
So, this will be achieved through the concept
called asymptotic complexity, which measures
the running time of an algorithm as inputs
grow larger and larger as the function of
the inputs.
And we will develop some notation, typically
the big O notation in order to smoothen out
some idiosyncrasies of algorithms and group
them into large chunks, which are equivalent.
An important part of problem solving in any
domain and in particular in algorithms is
the art of modelling the problem at a suitable
level of detail.
In most algorithms that we will see we need
to find a suitable mathematical model.
One of these will be graphs.
We need a way of representing the concepts
of these models in our algorithm.
For this, we need appropriate data structures.
And of course typically in order to solve
a problem we need to break it down into manageable
sub problems.
So, we will look at strategies to decompose
problems into smaller problems and see how
to put them together to solve the problem
it had.
Over the course of time, many generic techniques
have been developed to solve a large number
of problems.
And we will see examples of how these techniques
can be applied to very standard problems that
we come across repeatedly.
Among the techniques are divide and conquer.
Where, we break up the problem into individual
components which do not overlap with each
other and then combine these solutions in
order to get the solution for the overall
problems.
In some cases, we can identify a strategy
which looks at the local state of the problem
and chooses an optimal path and arrives at
the final solution without having to look
at all possibilities.
These kind of greedy algorithms are rare.
It is important to know how to prove such
an algorithm is correct.
But if a greedy algorithms does exists, it
is typically much more efficient than other
types of algorithms.
When greedy does not work, we need a systematic
way of exploring all the possibilities and
choosing the best one.
In this process, sometimes we have to discard
overlapping problems and make sure that we
do not wastefully recompute things.
So, this is covered by the concept of dynamic
programming.
Now along with the theory, in this course
we will have some programming assignments.
So, we do expect that all of you have some
background in programming.
This could be in C or C plus plus or java.
We are flexible about the language you use,
but you should be able to write standard programs
and implement some of the basic algorithms
that we are using in our course.
In order to do this, we will of course cover
some new data structures in this course.
But we do expect that in the language that
you use, you are familiar with basic concepts
like arrays and lists and also things like
stacks and queues, which build up on these.
Of course, when we come to stacks and queues
we will try to give some detail about how
they are used.
But we do expect that you have seen them before.
So, this not the first time you are seeing
these concepts.
Here is a kind of approximate list of the
topics we expect to cover in the course.
So, after looking at a few examples we will
start with asymptotic complexity, which is
the way of measuring the efficiency of an
algorithm and writing down this measure in
a way that we can compare easily across algorithms.
We will then move to the most basic problem
that we have for arrays, which is to search
an array for an element.
And in the process we will realize that it
is important to be able to sort the array
efficiently in order to arrange the elements
in a way where we can search in an effective
manner.
So, we will look at searching and sorting.
So, we will look at binary search and we will
look at different notions of sorting.
Some of which are more elementary and intuitive
like insertion sort and selection sort.
But are not the best in terms of efficiency.
And then we will look at more efficient algorithms
like merge sort and quick sort; which are
not obvious to begin with.
Moving on from searching and sorting, we come
to graphs and graph algorithms.
So, we will introduce graphs.
We will see how we can use them to model certain
types of problems.
We need to know how to represent a graph.
How do you?
Graph is essentially a picture, so how do
you translate this picture into something
that an algorithm can manipulate?
So, that is representation.
We will look at standard problems in graphs;
reachability and connectedness.
We will look at a special class of graphs
called directed acyclic graphs, which are
very useful for modelling certain kinds of
problems.
And then we will look at other canonical problems
on graphs including shortest paths and spanning
trees.
As we mentioned before, there are some basic
algorithmic design techniques; which are applied
across a class of problems.
So, we will look in particular divide and
conquer, greedy algorithms and dynamic programming.
Among the data structures that we will encounter
in this course are priority queues, which
are often implemented through heaps.
We will look at binary search trees, which
are efficient ways of maintaining information
in a sorted order dynamically as information
comes and goes.
And we will look at a very useful data structure
to maintain a partition of a set into a disjoint
collection of subsets; the so called union-find
algorithm.
And finally, depending on how much time is
left we will look at some miscellaneous topics.
It is important to realize that not every
algorithm admits an efficient solution.
So, we will look at problem of intractability
and some provably hard problems and some other
problems for which this status is unknown.
This is an eight week course.
The tentative schedule is as follows: in the
first week, we will do some motivating examples
and we will look at some notations and work
out some problems involving asymptotic complexity.
In the second week, we will move on to searching
and sorting.
In the third week, we will introduce graphs
and look at basic graph algorithms.
We will continue with more graph algorithms.
And then in the process, introduce the disjoint
set data structure.
We will then formally look at divide and conquer,
which you would have already seen along the
way.
But we will look at it again.
And then we will introduce heaps.
In the sixth week, we will do search trees
and some examples of greedy algorithms and
their proofs.
In the seventh week, we will be devoted to
dynamic programming.
And then in the last week we will cover miscellaneous
topics.
Now, you should remember that this is only
an approximate schedule and there will be
some variations.
But roughly this is the sequence and the speed
at which we plan to cover the material in
the course.
You can also see alongside the weeks.
The calendar weeks that these correspond to.
So, to the first week of the course is the
current week which is January fifth to ninth.
And this course will go on till the last week
of February.
Now as part of the evaluation for the course,
there will be continuous evaluations.
Every week, there will be quizzes.
There will also be programming assignments;
roughly six programming assignments across
the eight weeks.
After the course ends, there will be a certification
exam.
In order to get a certificate that you have
successfully completed this course, you need
to score 60 percent in the quizzes and in
the certification exam.
You need to submit at least five or six; out
of the six assignments.
And at least, four of them you must do something
non-trivial.
We will be following two main text books.
Although, I will not use the text books directly
in the course, but if you want to look up
some materials you will find them in these
two books.
The first book is called ÒAlgorithm designÓ
by Jon Kleinberg and Eva Tardos.
And the second book is just called ÒAlgorithmsÓ
by Sanjay Dasgupta, Christos Papadimitriou
and Umesh Vazirani.
The book by Kleinberg and Tardos is more detailed
and it has a number of really nice examples
to illustrate many of the concepts and quite
detailed proofs.
The book by Dasgupta Papadimitriou and Vazirani
is a slimmer book.
It is more easy and accessible to read on
your own.
But on the other hand it does leave a lot
of details as exercises.
So, in order to really understand the material,
you really need to spend more time working
out the exercises and not just go by the material
that presented in the chapters.